# Ordering

As we mentioned before, milkdown core will load atoms one by one.
The order of the atoms loaded matters.

We have defined a `LoadState` enum so Atoms can be loaded **after the pointed loadState**.
You can access certain properties in context during the given load state.

**Generally speaking, there is no need for you to set the load state of an atom,
we have provide some utilities for users to create certain types of atoms.**

---

## LoadState

The `LoadState` enum has following values:

### 1. Idle:

This state means the editor is preparing, nothing has been loaded.

Property in context that available at this moment:

-   _loadState_: Current load status.
-   _remark_: The remark parser instance.
-   _nodes_: The nodes has been loaded at this moment.
-   _marks_: The marks has been loaded at this moment.

### 2. LoadSchema:

This state means the editor is ready to generate the schema.

Property in context that available at this moment:

-   All properties available in Idle.

### 3. SchemaReady:

This state means the editor has generated the schema.

Property in context that available at this moment:

-   All properties available in LoadSchema.
-   _schema_: The generated schema.
-   _parser_: The markdown parser generated by schema.
-   _serializer_: The markdown serializer generated by schema.
-   _keymap_: The keymap generated by schema.
-   _inputRules_: The inputRules generated by schema.
-   _nodeViews_: The nodeViews generated by schema.

### 4. LoadPlugin:

This state means the editor is ready to load prosemirror plugin.

Property in context that available at this moment:

-   All properties available in SchemaReady.
-   _prosemirrorPlugins_: The prosemirror plugins to be loaded.

### 5. Complete:

This state means the editor has fully loaded.

Property in context that available at this moment:

-   All properties available in LoadPlugin.
-   _editorView_: The view instance of prosemirror.
